Well, I mean, I think by the time we get here next week, we will have been Christmas-ified here in the auditorium.
Give me a show of hands if you've already got your Christmas decorations up.
Oh, I love that.
Do you know what?
We were so tempted.
The only reason we haven't is that our lounge is full of laundry at the moment, and it just doesn't offset the right vibe.
But it's going to happen probably tomorrow.
And if you're doing it this week, give me a show of hands, not yet, but you're about to.
Yes.
the traditionalists who have to wait until the beginning of Advent, officially, first of December.
Okay, well, this morning we're going to be doing things a little bit differently.
About two and a half years ago now, I interviewed our then relatively new community pastor, Eddie Lawless.
And since then, so much has happened.
And we really wanted to bring us as a church into the loop of what's taking place beyond the four walls of Skylark.
Now, obviously, in and through each one of us, we are an extension of the church wherever we go.
So it's not necessarily all about the centralised thing, but
As we step into our centenary year in January, 100 years since the inception of this church, I want to remind us that Skylark Church began as Bethel Church and actually it was just one woman who saw a need on her doorstep.
She saw a group of children playing and the story goes that her heart was moved with compassion because she saw these kids playing
The Lord just began to whisper to her that they were like sheep without a shepherd, and she was moved by that.
And the Holy Spirit prompted her to take action just to do something about that need that she saw.
And she invited those kids into her home, and a little Sunday school was born.
And then she began to invite parents and carers and families, and it just began to grow.
And that's part of our DNA.
seeing need on our doorstep and not turning a blind eye, but actually rolling our past leaves and getting stuck in.
We are a church that is called to local mission and to translocal mission.
And a couple of years ago, we shared with you as a church a vision that we had had.
Well, actually, it happened in real life.
It wasn't even a vision.
We saw a tractor going past as we were praying in France.
And we sense that the Lord was talking to us about harvest and that we were coming into a season of harvest as a church.
And I want to tell you in a moment, you're going to hear stories of just a snapshot of some of the incredible things that God is doing through Skylark Church and through other churches in Champsford to see his kingdom come and that harvest is happening.
In Isaiah 61, it says this.
The spirit of the sovereign Lord is upon me, for the Lord has anointed me to bring good news to the poor.
He has sent me to comfort the brokenhearted and to proclaim that captives will be released and prisoners will be freed.
He has sent me to tell those who mourn that the time of the Lord's favor has come and with it the day of God's anger against their enemies.
to all who mourn in Israel.
He will give a crown of beauty for ashes, a joyous blessing instead of mourning, festive praise instead of despair, what an exchange.
In their righteousness, they will be like great oaks that the Lord has planted for his own glory.
They will rebuild the ancient ruins repairing cities destroyed long ago.
They will revive them.
though they have been deserted for many generations.
You know, our community is just one of the ways in which we here as a church outwork that mandate in Isaiah 61.
And so I'd love to welcome up Eddie Lawless, and we're going to have a little conversation about what's happening.
Come on up, Eddie.
Hello.
Eddie, we have vision statements on our wall.
We see a church offering shelter to the marginalized, rest to the weary, justice to the oppressed, and restoration to the broken.
And we also have one that says, we see a church embracing, enriching, and impacting the local community.
Those are powerful statements of vision, aren't they?
And it's two and a half years since we lasted this, time has flown, flies when you're having fun.
Are you having fun?
Yeah, that's good to hear.
So much has happened and it's hard to really know where to start.
But I'd like to start with you to begin with.
Can you share the why behind the what we do?
Because it's really easy for us to delve straight into activity and to tell everybody what we're doing.
But I'd like to start with the heartbeat.
What is that thing that gets you out of bed in the morning that you're most passionate about seeing?
And why are we doing this stuff?
OK, so the why?
Sorry, I'm just getting comfortable.
If you know me well, you know, I don't sit normally ever.
And so the why is people.
And anyone who knows me well will know that people are both
the most frustrating part of my job, but also the thing that gets me out of bed.
Like, I just fascinated by people.
I love hearing their stories.
I love getting alongside people and building relationships with people.
So the people are the why.
Like, I love every single person in this room.
I love our church family.
But just by very nature of you being here, you're already on a journey with Jesus, even if it's like the very beginning.
Maybe your 10 decades deep, well, maybe not 10, but many decades
deep or maybe it's your first time in church but you've already made that step to find out more about who Jesus is.
What I get to do in my role as community pastor is go out there and meet with people who have not yet experienced anything to do with Jesus and I get to do that in sometimes really overt ways with the alpha course and stuff like that where it's
The sole purpose is to talk to them about Jesus, but it also gets to it in really subtle ways, where I can just build relationships with people, and Jesus isn't necessarily the focus point in terms of what we're there for, but it just brings Jesus in in a really gentle, subtle way through relationship building and just journeying with people.
And so that's the why, and I'm just super passionate about
people particularly those on the margins and those that don't necessarily fit in our society in the way that a lot of us do and I'm probably passionate about that because I found myself on those fringes in the past and in my life and various points so I recognize how it feels to feel like you don't belong or that you don't fit or this isn't for you or you're not good enough and so that's kind of the driving force and
The point for me is to bring light into the darkness and you can't bring light into the darkness unless you're prepared to go into the dark.
And that's something that God spoke really clearly when I took this role on.
It's like we're not just going to do the same as we've always done.
We're not going to just tread that path that's already been trodden.
We're going to go into the rough terrain and we're going to find ourselves in places that maybe we would prefer not to be because that's where it's darkest and that's where my light is needed the most.
Beautiful.
And at Advent, what a great depiction as well.
We think about light in the darkness, Jesus being the light of the world, but then that commission is for us also to be the light of the world.
Now, these verses in Isaiah that I read out at the start of this interview, they touch on good news for the poor, they touch on captives being set free, binding up the brokenhearted,
and so much more this idea of rebuilding ruins, this rebuilding those deserted places and spaces and we can look around the city of Chelmsford and surrounding areas from which many of us come in from here at Skylark Church and just see so many deserted places in our communities right now.
I know that
this work has significantly expanded in the last couple of years.
So I'd love it if you could just give us an overview on Vision Sunday.
Pete always reels off so much that's happening both in the church, beyond the church.
And what you hear are maybe two sentences, but behind each of those two sentences, there's probably a day's worth of conversation that we could have.
So for us, this is a way of kind of preparing before January for us as a church to understand that behind those headlines, there are so many lives being impacted.
So tell us, what are some of the key community activities
projects long-term vision that we are sowing into and then we're going to zoom in much more closely on some specifics.
We have probably, well, it started as six main areas that we invest into in our community.
It's now seven because, you know,
God loves the number seven.
I think that's okay.
There is something about seven, isn't there?
So firstly, let's start with poverty.
So obviously there is a deep need in our country at the moment to alleviate poverty.
And we do that in a very practical way, which is beautiful.
And it's a way that a lot of our volunteers can get involved with.
And so we deliver hampers to the local community.
And we're given those names by local schools and people within our congregation, the council, and we deliver those
hampers once a month and then an extra one at Christmas with nice treats and just ways to make them feel loved and seen and we also cook meals well I say we
you wouldn't want it if I'd cooked it.
The wonderful Leslie Kemp and the team, I think Paul and Kimmy are amongst those people, they come and they cook every month like hundreds of meals that then get distributed out with our hampers and they just remain in our freezer as well for people within the church that may need meals at any point.
So they just do such an amazing job and it's so nice for people to receive a home-cooked meal, not just bog-standard bits that they have to do something with.
We have been very blessed to have a bursary fund that we're able to access for people within the community and that looks like, we'll get a phone call from the council for example, this is one thing that's happened saying there's a young woman with twins moving into the area, she has absolutely nothing.
how can you help and we can go, oh, we can get her a bed, we can get her some bedding, we can get her toys for the kids, we can do, do, do, do, do, and just be able to do it because that money is sat there ready for situations just like that.
Wow.
Yeah, it's cool.
It's awesome, isn't it?
It's really cool.
When I get to do stuff like that, it's like, I love my job, this is so cool.
But we do it in various different ways.
We've given freezers, we've given washing machines, and we've had
calls just saying, is there any chance that you give some vouchers to this lady?
She's got no food at all, and she can't relate with people very well, so would it be possible to just bring a voucher and we're able to do that.
So that's poverty.
And prison, and we're going to delve into this a bit more, but I'll give you the highlights.
So we have been working in the prison now for about a year and a half, and we run Sunday services, so basically we do this.
in there every couple of months.
Even on Christmas Day, the team went in last year.
Christmas Day, we went in last year, which was awesome.
Really cool.
We do a mental health and wellbeing course in there that we run on a Monday night.
We have launched the first ever Messy Church in prison, which is very cool.
So we've done two of those.
We do one every holidays.
So that's been really exciting.
We are helping and taking over the running of Alpha in the prison in the New Year, and we offer press support in there as well.
So the prison is growing.
exponentially.
It's very, very cool.
So exciting.
Yes.
Modern day slavery.
We sit on various different groups within the cast thing.
I don't know what the word is, but cast stands.
chance with against slavery partnership.
So it's a multi-organizational link with the council and the police that looks at how we can address modern day slavery in our city and how we can impact.
So we sit on various boards, the steering board, the disruption group and survival care, which we're working quite closely with at the moment to see how we can support those who have been
freed from that environment and now are in survival mode.
So it's a very exciting part of my job.
There was one time where I went on a disruption thing.
whatever they call it, and I was driving around in a police car and just happened to see somebody from the church at a petrol station and got out of the car and he was like, all right Eddy, okay, what are you doing?
I was like, I can't say, it's really awkward, but yeah, definitely see a lot of interesting things working in that area.
So if that was you now you know.
And restored, which is our domestic abuse arm.
We support victims and survivors of domestic abuse.
That looks like going to court.
It looks like one-to-one or two-to-one interactions, like little WhatsApp groups supporting one another, safe spaces for people to come and use our building as a place where they can make phone calls or use the internet.
We also support other churches in the area with that and because we were the beacon church, like the first beacon church and I'm the beacon lead, I get to kind of just go, right, this is what we've experienced and this is how it looks like for us and kind of support them on their journey as well.
So that's really cool.
Schools work.
So we work in secondary schools and we work in Shumpswood College.
In secondary schools we run a course called Flourish which is for girls and we run that in five different schools at the moment with a brilliant team and we're going to talk more about that so I won't go too much about that.
But we're also writing or almost finished writing with wonderful Kate Gower now our youth pastor and a boys course as well which is going to be
launching in the New Year and piloting to see if we can impact some of the boys in our schools as well.
So so needed.
So needed.
And I also go into the Chancellor's College and offer counseling for particularly children who've been bereaved.
And there's been a really high number of suicides, not just pupils, but pupils' parents who have remained really, really stuck in that grief.
So I go in and offer some counseling to them as well.
and mental health that leads on to you nicely and we offer one-to-one support here and we have a brilliant counseling team and and we have Kinsugi hope which is a emotional well-being group and we run that here as well and so we're just trying to continue to break down the stigma related to mental health and make sure people realise that it's okay to admit that you're not doing okay and this is a safe place in order to see that
And finally, loneliness and isolation, we really recognise that that is an epidemic in our country and we're just trying to meet some of the needs there.
So we have Leanne, who runs Belong on a Monday, which is just this beautiful intergenerational group.
Isn't it gorgeous?
Just stunning.
I remember on Christmas Day, I think it was Christmas Day last year, the
Most senior member of that group had a phone call from one of the youngest because she just couldn't possibly imagine not saying happy Christmas to this guy, which is just gorgeous.
So those relationships have been built and they transcend what happened here on a Monday.
We're also looking at befriending services and getting involved with care homes and things like that as well in order to meet the need of isolation.
So that's the seven.
Well, not much then.
Wow.
I'd like to zoom in now because that's just broad brushstrokes, but there's stories, there's real lives, there's incredible team members, there's so much work that goes and prayer that goes into each of these areas.
And I'd like us to focus on prison because when Pete and I joined the church back in 2001 now, one of the first areas that we ever served in was prison alpha.
And I remember we used to go in, didn't we, quite regularly with a team
But then I can't remember exactly when, maybe several years later, our access into the prison just got the door kind of shut.
And when you stepped into your role, that door was still very much shut, wasn't it?
But it's been on our heart and something that we've been collectively praying for and longing for for some time to really be able to get into the prison and to bring hope to those inmates in champs for as long as they're with us.
Well, it would be lovely for you to tell us a bit about Champs for Prison anyway because it's quite unique in the way it functions in terms of how long inmates are there for.
So tell us a little bit about the journey that led up to that open door and some of the stories that you are able to share about how we've seen God at work.
Yeah, it's an exciting story and I could bore you to death on this so I will try not to get too excited and too much.
As you said, people have been praying for years for us, like, really diligently praying.
And it just hasn't happened.
And when I first took on this role, honestly, it wasn't really on my horizon.
Like, I knew we wanted to be in, but I wasn't really sure where to start.
And then, you know, it all happened.
But rollback nearly nine years ago when we first joined this church was a nine or 10 years ago.
Ten, I think.
10 years ago when we joined this church and our first Sunday, Nikki saw us sat right over there and came over to us and was like, I've got a word for UT.
Now, I come from a church where that's not normal.
So I was a bit like, okay, weird.
I came brilliant.
So she, she spoke to us and she was like, I've just got this real sense that you are going to have keys.
like lots of keys and they're really ornate and there's loads of them and they all open different doors and you're just going to be collecting them but at some point in the future you're going to be holding these keys and then Champs of Prison happened and now I hold these keys which is just, it blows my mind how God can use something that was prophesied in ten years ago and now we're seeing it
come into fruition and I guess as an encouragement, if something was spoken over to you over you a long time ago and you're like, well, I haven't seen it yet, God, what are you doing?
just keep believing for it because it will come, what he promises he fulfills.
And so now I hold these keys which is, you know, it blows my mind, it's actually bonkers.
And actually other people on my team now hold keys as well and they think it's bonkers too.
But we have access and we literally have those doors flinging wide open for us and it's been relatively easy which just shows it must be God.
God's fingerprints have been all over it because it's absolutely nothing I do.
In fact,
I didn't even think to say, can I come and work in the prison?
I was going in, going, oh, how can we support you?
How can we pray for you?
How can we offer you some supervision back at our church?
And she was like, I think, actually.
You need to come in here.
So, yeah, it's God.
It's entirely God.
Now I actually give one day of my week to the prison, spread over two afternoons and evenings.
And like I said, we do Sunday services, which are just beautiful.
We run Kinsugi in there, which is the wellbeing and mental health group that's on a Monday night with a team of people who are insanely good at what they do.
And we get to meet with usually around 12 guys at any one time, who can come and be honest and open and vulnerable, which I did not expect in a prison.
I did not expect people to be able to be vulnerable with each other, let alone ours.
I thought they were going to come with this.
What do you know about anything?
Like, why would I talk to you?
But they've been really vulnerable and we've had tears, we've had joyous moments, we've celebrated with them, we've commiserated with them, we've been on the ground in their just absolute despair.
And it's such a beautiful privilege.
And now we run alpha.
I think it was probably about three or four weeks ago.
Seven of the guys at Alpha gave their life to Jesus, which was just like, what?
It was so cool.
So getting to witness what Jesus is doing in the lives of these people, despite their circumstances, despite the cells, despite the keys, despite the closed doors,
God is not restricted by any of that.
And he is transforming lives in that place, which is so exciting.
And a couple of stories.
So there was one guy who comes every Sunday and he loves a certain song.
And I was walking through the prison on a day that wasn't a Sunday to a different event that I'd been invited to speak at.
And all I heard from one of the cells as I was walking across the ground, so I was, open the eyes of my heart, Lord.
And I was like,
I know exactly who that is.
I know exactly.
And he did it to get my attention.
He knew I'd knew who he was if he sang that song.
So later on in the day, I went and found him.
I was like, that was you, wasn't it?
And he's like, yeah, yeah, that was me.
And I was like, right, OK, we're in next Sunday.
You're going to sing it with me on Sunday.
And from there, we have seen
spontaneous worship break out at the end of a service on a Sunday which is just beautiful and that is thanks to the team because we have musicians that come in with us and they're so gracious like they've spent a lot of money on their equipment their guitars are worth a lot like and they're just like yeah go for it you want to go have it and they allow these men to come and try things out some of them have got no idea how to play an instrument but they have a go anyway others are
immensely talented and this is the only opportunity they get to play an instrument and to have that creativity and that freedom so it started from this place of like okay come on come and worship with us which then led to this a guy came up and started playing the keys and then they started worshiping and then a guy came up to me and was like Miss can I have the microphone and I'm thinking
Always a dangerous day, even in church to be fair.
Absolutely.
This could go either way.
And I wasn't sure how the officers were going to respond either because this is after the service.
They're getting ready to go back to their cells.
And I was like, OK, here you go.
And he started wrapping and singing Waymaker.
And the entire room started worshiping with him.
Now, I can say that's one of the most exciting worship experiences that I've ever had.
It's so cool.
And now, because of that, we now invite a couple of the guys to
play the guitar and to play the keys when we go in there.
So we're worshipping together now, and it is beautiful.
We've got guys who come to the Alpha course who are writing their own songs, writing their own raps, and at the end of Alpha, they're trying it out with some of the guys that play instruments.
So it turns into this jamming session.
He's like, Miss, Miss, what do you think of these words?
Is this biblically accurate?
And I'm like, I don't know, maybe.
I hope so.
It's great.
It's really, really beautiful.
We're just seeing signs of light
life springing up all over the place and it is the biggest privilege.
I can't tell you the buzz that we as a team get from being in that place.
We get much more from them than they receive from ours and God is doing a new thing in that place.
It's super, super exciting.
I love this on so many levels.
Firstly, because I think isn't that just the kingdom.
We often take what we think we have into a place and of course you and the team are bringing light and hope and love and building those bridges that we spoke of earlier into Champs of Prism which is beautiful.
But I love that this is the way God works that actually we are not only slightly enriched by that.
even more blessed and even more enriched by what those people that we are there to serve bring to us and that's just the beauty of the kingdom for me.
Two things I just want to pick up on briefly because you talked about that day when seven of the inmates in Alpha gave their lives to Jesus and there was something really profound for Peter and I that week because here at the gathering on the Sunday
we invited people to respond to the gospel and we had seven responses here in church and then it was, what day was it, Tuesday?
So the Tuesday of the same week, same number in Champs of Prison and for the two of us, we've talked for a really long time about the fact that we want to see this bridge built
into our community so that actually what happens in a church is going out into our city, into our neighbourhoods, but also that there's this through flow in the other direction and this felt like such a significant moment and that kind of critical mass of what we have been longing for and praying for, that there was this symmetry between what happened here
in the building and what was happening out there and obviously there's more that happens than we'll ever know.
We can't always gauge what's happening but that to us was such an encouraging sign and we want you as a church to be encouraged by that and to keep praying for this because there's more to come for certain.
But secondly, Eddie won't say this because she's probably got too much in her head to actually say to you all but
The commitment to do alpha, we're not talking a small commitment.
We run alpha in church and that's already a significant commitment for those on the team.
But alpha in prison runs every single week of the year.
So that is no small commitment.
This is us being a consistent presence week on week.
And I suppose I'm saying that because these guys need your prayers, but also there may be some of you that are just sitting here thinking, I could get involved with that.
I feel like I could get on board with that.
You know, if we're not spending our lives on the kingdom of God, if we're not spending our time advancing that,
We're losing out, but also other people are losing out.
So what could be on the other side of your committed yes today, I wonder?
Just throwing that out there.
Okay, so we need to move on from the prison reluctantly.
I know you've got many more stories, actually.
If we have time, maybe you'll give us one more.
But for now, let's move on because I'd love us to talk about flourish.
and the work that we're doing into secondary schools and into Champsford College.
I believe we're now working into five local schools, is that right?
Yeah, five local schools.
And the reason why we don't do more than that is not because we don't want to, or they don't want us to, it's just purely a case of capacity.
So the minute we can, we will be going further.
But flourish has been
going for about 15 years, which is amazing.
I mean, just that in itself.
The fact that we've been investing in the lives of young girls in our secondary schools for nearly 15 years is
incredible and it continues to flourish.
I mean, it's been rewritten many times.
We look at it quite strategically every couple of years and go, okay, is this still relevant?
Do we need to adapt this?
What are they actually facing in the real world right now and adapt to that?
But it's brilliant and it is continuing to flourish.
There's so much about it that I just absolutely love.
We work with around 250 girls a year during the course.
It's a six-week course and it is all about building self-esteem, value and understanding their place in the world.
It's a safe and inclusive place for girls, which there aren't that many of, particularly in the school environment.
I didn't really love school.
It wasn't my favorite place to be.
In fact, I was there as little as possible, if I'm honest.
I did the bare minimum to get to where I needed to be.
And it wasn't fun.
And part of the reason why it wasn't fun was because there was such an expectation on me as a girl to be a certain way.
And I just felt very overwhelmed by it all.
And had there been something like this, then who knows how my life might have looked?
We look at things like,
and perfectionism and body image and what the media tells us about who we are, how to use the power of our words to build people up rather than to tear them down.
We look at consent and the power of our yes and no and that particularly has been really interesting recently because we've been putting together some grant funding and so we've got a lot of feedback from the schools which has been remarkable and really encouraging actually.
And one of the things that we've noticed in doing the stats
is that the biggest jump in terms of where they were when they started and where they were when they finished was their understanding of how important and how powerful their know can be and I just think if nothing else that is amazing just basic things like if you go to somebody's house and they offer you a drink are you going to say if you want to or not and the majority of them say oh I just wouldn't ask I just wouldn't say anything because
They are not empowered to use their voices.
So that's been really interesting.
So interesting.
The girls love it.
It's very different from their normal school sessions.
They love coming out for an hour and having real investment into who they are.
We have the most incredible team.
They're beautiful.
And I think every single person on our team has wrestled with some of this stuff themselves, which means they're perfectly placed to feed into the lives of these girls from a place of understanding and knowing.
And a lot of them say that they are healing whilst they're bringing healing to these girls.
So it's not just about what they're bringing.
They're actually receiving a huge amount from it as well.
The schools have said that the girls are more engaged in their school life as a result of flourish, that they have better appear and student teacher relationships as a result of flourish, that they are not in isolation or in detention as regularly because of flourish, that they are able to coexist in their classrooms much more easily because of what we do and what we bring and that they are empowered to speak
about what they want and what they don't want in their environments that they find themselves.
And I just think that is brilliant.
I mean, one of the reasons we do flourish is because we don't want them to end up needing restored.
So young girls who have got low self esteem and low self value are far more likely to find themselves in abusive relationships as they get older.
So if we can
preempt that problem and deal with that issue and raise their self esteem and their self worth at that age in its year eight.
So it's early in their secondary school career and maybe just maybe we might avoid some of those girls turning into women who are struggling to get out of an abusive relationship.
So that's the reason.
It just so happens that it's loads of fun and that the girls love it.
We've got one story actually and it sounds like a bit of a negative story but it just shows the grace that our and facilitators have.
So there was a particular group at one of the schools who had a couple of really tricky girls in the group.
They were really disruptive and they found it very hard to connect and it was just difficult.
And then they went away, they'd finished the session, they went away for the week and then
They were told when they went back that these two girls had been removed from the group because of some of the things they were saying about the facilitators outside of the environment.
And it was pretty dark and pretty awful.
And I spoke to my facilitators, I was like, what do you need from us?
Like, how can we support you?
Blah, blah, blah, blah.
How do you want this to go?
And they were like, no, we're all good.
And we want to give them the opportunity to come back if they want to.
And I just thought, you know what?
That is grace.
That is so much grace poured out on these girls.
These girls had said some really hurtful things about their facilitators.
Yet they were like, no, I'm going to show the love of Jesus in this way.
And I'm going to say it's okay for you to come back.
Yeah, we need some boundaries put in place and that won't be tolerated again.
But you get to come back into this environment despite your behavior because we see past that to you and we can see how much you need this.
So I just love that.
That is so beautiful, so beautiful.
And I think having two daughters myself, one of the things I keep saying at the moment is I just don't feel as a parent that I can pour enough confidence into my girls.
I just want to pour as much confidence into them now as they navigate school life and as they begin to grow.
And I'm so thankful that something like Flourish exists here in our city because
They don't just need to hear this from me.
They need to hear it from as many voices as possible.
And I'm so grateful that we as a church have an opportunity to give voice to some of this stuff, to open those dialogues and to talk about the power of our words, the power of our yes and our no, and what it looks like to build one another up, to have a healthy self-esteem.
All of that is so, so necessary.
Now, thinking about flourish, I know you've got big vision and you did a lead to the fact that we want to do something similar ultimately for boys.
You've been in the process of developing a course that really matters to us as well, that we don't just focus on girls because that's only 50% of the story and the population.
But we do have some very real constraints at the moment, don't we?
And I'd just love to talk about, okay, what are some of our needs, but also what are some of our future hopes?
so that we can be praying?
Yes, so I would imagine quite a few of you saw the TV show Adolescence and having watched that and my own experience of the secondary school environment, I was like, we can't just leave this.
We need to do something for boys and
perspective, Peter Nicky and various other people who had a similar uprising, like this cannot be the story for our boys either.
And so Kate and I have been writing the course in order to get into schools.
But as you say, there are some constrictions that we are facing with this work.
And funding is one of those things.
So Flourish has always been externally funded and a lot of our money has come through the Council over the years.
With everything that's changing with local councils at the moment, that funding is drying up quite considerably and we are finding ourselves needing to reach out into different ways in order to fundraise because we do not want the reason why this has to stop to be because of money.
That can't be the reason.
The only reason it stops is there's not a problem anymore.
Until that happens, we keep going as far as I'm concerned.
We're not worried because we know that God provides, but it is a very real current barrier that we have and we do want to expand it.
We don't want to limit this to five schools and only girls.
We want to be in every single secondary school in Oxford, boys and girls.
That's going to take resource, that's going to take facilitators, that's going to take men stepping up as well in order to make that happen in schools.
Yes, we can do it as women, but
Wouldn't it be great if we had men delivering a course to boys about what it means to be a man and how you can develop that, that you don't have to follow this very narrow path that you're shown, that you can deviate from that and you can still be just as much of a man.
So we're really passionate about that and we love more people to be praying.
We have an incredible group of people who every second Wednesday
pray for our community work.
They go together on Zoom, they pray together, we kind of send in any prayer requests that we might have, but they just diligently and consistently pray for what we do.
And we'd love more people to get involved in that.
I know Rosemary would be like, yes, please, more than Mary are, please come and join us.
So prayer is the undergirding for everything that we do.
Without that, we are nothing.
So prayer, yes.
But we'll say, if you work for a business and they are
in the business or getting tax relief by donating to local charities, then please.
We've got some information that we can give you.
You can hand that over.
There's various, there's loads of creative ways that we can get money in order to continue this work because this is not where it ends.
There is so much more that we can be investing into our local community in this way.
It's so very needed.
Every school in their feedback, well, like, if you could offer us more, we'd take it.
We can't actually do our pastoral work without you.
You feel a vital gap.
So the need is there.
We're answering that need.
We just need more.
So that's something for us to be praying for, Church.
I mean, I really do believe that God wants to provide for this in all those ways.
Perhaps you're sitting here today, you're a guy.
and your heart is just beginning to pound a little bit faster because this is something you're passionate about.
If that's you, come and find Eddie.
I know all of us, we'd love to talk to you about how you could get involved in the future.
Perhaps you're sitting here and you think, gosh, you know, I really want to be praying for this.
I can't tell you how much your prayers and our prayers make a difference to those who are serving on the ground.
Eddie is, we're giving the highlights today.
But there is a lot of resistance when you are out there pioneering things in different spaces.
And that requires a church who are praying.
And this is something we're passionate about.
We have a prayer room here.
Come in and get praying for our community.
Add yourself to the Zoom.
Commit to praying daily.
However you want to do that, we need your prayers.
And finally, as she said, if you're somebody that maybe has access to pots of funding, or perhaps you're someone that's really
really skilled in putting together fundraising bids.
We would love your help.
We can't be expert at everything here in Skylar Church.
There is so much beyond this one area that takes place in and through the life of the Church.
I could interview so many people on our team and our wider core team who volunteer about what they are currently doing.
So if you have expertise that you could bring to you to Eddie and the team, we would
absolutely love that.
So please just take that as a way as a little how could I help be part of the solution for that.
Now Eddie you talked about the fact that this is I suppose let's call it a proactive way of preparing girls for some of the issues that will face them
later in life or actually not even later in life sadly now but some of the priorities for our local authorities and for the police in particular we're going to touch on now because one of the other things that we're significantly involved in is the Ministry of Restored and
If you've been in the church for any length of time, you will remember that we went through whole church training on this.
We had Becca Leg, he heads up restored.
We stand against domestic violence and domestic abuse in all its forms, whether that is inside the church and Christian households and families and relationships or whether that is beyond.
And the work has really grown.
We were the first beacon church
We're really proud in the right sense of the word of that.
You know, that was a pioneering step and we've always had that pioneering DNA as a church.
But I want to quote Chief Constable Ben Julian Harrington because I read this quote this week on the Essex Police Facebook page and it said this, violence against women and girls remains one of the most pressing issues of our time.
When half of the population cannot feel safe, and I do want to also acknowledge that it happens to men as well, and we're very aware of that, and we are working into that too.
But when half of the population cannot feel safe, whether in public or in their own homes, it becomes a national crisis.
and we will not ignore it.
Now, I was moved by that quote because I thought that's what we stand for.
As a church, we will not ignore this either, whether that's in the church or beyond the church.
We want to stand with victims.
We want to stand with those who are living in that place of oppression.
But I also noticed that Essex Police had to disable the comments on that quote because of so much negativity.
That's horrific.
I just feel like that's horrific.
That is not okay.
But it shows you that this is such a hard area to be working into.
This is not easy.
There's resistance.
Now, I want to know how our work has been quietly expanding ever since Eddy.
I know you probably won't be able to share specific stories for understandable reasons and we would not want you to.
But can you give us a snapshot of the difference we're making?
We're hitting time, but let's go for it.
Yeah, I mean, it is the very nature of it means that it's secretly happening behind the scenes.
So you might not necessarily hear us talking about what's going on, but it doesn't mean that nothing is going on and one in four.
are affected by the domestic abuse.
One in four women are affected by domestic abuse.
That is the alarming stats.
And that's the same in this room as anywhere else in the country.
Don't get it twisted.
This can happen here.
One in six men, and the likelihood is it's much higher than that, but they just don't disclose as much.
So this is a huge problem in our society.
So it's a necessary thing for us to be doing.
Yes, we work quietly.
We offer safety.
We offer a non-judgmental space.
We offer understanding because many of us, many of the team, myself included, have a lived experience of this.
So we are able to meet these women mostly, but some men as well, at a place of understanding, which is so very important.
We work in with around 60 women, either within our church or the wider community.
And just recently, over the last year, we've seen a real
increase in other churches in the area, reaching out for advice and support and just a bit of guidance on how to deal with domestic abuse in their own context, which is great because sometimes we can be a bit funny about asking other people that are doing the same sort of stuff of us.
for advice, can't we?
We can be a bit like, well, no, I don't want to ask them.
They might think we don't know anything.
But there's none of that.
There's just like the barriers have dropped.
And it's just like, do you know what?
You've had the training.
You're already doing it.
Can you help us?
Which is a beautiful sign of kingdom and of working together.
Which is brilliant.
We've just had a new injection of team who've just trained up over the last couple of months that have got a burning passion for this work.
As you can see, there's one of me and there's a huge amount of stuff to do.
And restored is one of those things that I'd love to do more, but I just don't have capacity.
So this uprising of team who are just ready to go and have got loads of cool ideas is going to take this to the next level.
So we're really excited about that.
So exciting.
Eddie, I mean,
I could talk to you all day and there's a lot more that we wanted to chat through today that we haven't managed to get to but I'm really mindful of kids' church.
More is really mindful of kids' church.
Those guys are amazing up there but we don't want to overstep their boundaries because it's sometimes challenging looking after everybody else's children whilst we talk nicely and quietly down here.
So I'm going to draw this to a close.
I know that one of the other things had we had time that you wanted to touch on is our passion to do more into the area of mental health and we're passionate about kintsugi as one of the vehicles for that and we need people who are passionate about running kintsugi so if you're sitting here today and that's you
please come and talk to Eddy, or if you know someone who's not here today and you've had this kind of conversation, training is available, but we really do need more man and woman power on the ground for mental health and kinsugi in particular, don't we?
I think what it would be great for us to do is pray, and I'd love us to stand as a church as we do that.
Eddy, come and stand here.
First, I want to say thank you to all of the volunteers and team who serve.
our vision for community.
We're so grateful to you.
And now I'd love to pray, and I'm praying over Eddie more as a kind of a symbol because she's spearheading this, but obviously really what we're praying for is just the extension of kingdom calm and those verses in Isaiah.
So why don't you stretch your hands out with me.
Lord, I thank you so much for all that we've heard today.
And Lord, I realise that behind some of those conversations and those moments where we could have lingered, there would have been countless more people, stories, impact, challenge than we could ever convey in this short space of time.
But Father, we realise that right now the harvest is ripe and the labourers are few.
And Lord, we just asked today
that you would provide absolutely everything that we need to continue the work that we're doing and not only maintain it but to expand it further.
Lord, to dream bigger, to step out into new and uncharted waters.
Father, I pray today that for those who have their arm out and
maybe a real desire to get involved, that they wouldn't walk away and forget about it.
Lord, for those who could maybe open doors for us into funding pots or into income streams to help us fund some of the areas where we really need to see finance coming in, I just asked Lord that you would do what only you can.
And for those who feel called to pray, to be those prayer warriors who would surround this work with protection, but also pray for those new and pioneering inroads that we will make, just like Marwai Brown, when she looked out of her doorstep and knew she could meet a need.
Father, I pray that we would always be a church that sees the need
that knows that we can't do it in our own strength and in our natural resource, but still takes a face step to do it anyway.
And I pray a blessing over Eddie and all of the team today.
We thank you for each and everyone.
May they go from strength to strength.
Amen.